Explainer on user-defined operators (#202)
ethereum/solidity-blog: _posts/2023-02-22-user-defined-operators.md

#### Which Operators Can Be User-Defined?
| Category   | Operators                        |
|------------|----------------------------------|
| Bitwise    | `&`, `\|`, `^`,  `~`             |
| Arithmetic | `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%`          |
| Comparison | `==`, `!=`, `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=` |

Of the operators listed above, `~` is unary, `-` can be both unary and binary and the rest is always binary.
Note that Solidity does not have unary `+`.

#### Which Types Can Have User-Defined Operators?
Currently, operators can only be defined for user-defined value types.
We are also considering enabling them for structs and enums in future releases.
There are no plans, for now, to allow defining operators for built-in value types, especially in cases where
an operator is already provided by the compiler.

Note that the type wildcard (`*`) is not allowed in `using for` when defining operators, which
is in line with how it already worked when used to attach individual functions.

Since currently there are no implicit conversions allowed to and from UDVTs, user-defined operators
must always be invoked with exact types.

#### What Are the Restrictions on User-Defined Operator Definitions?

> The operator definition must be a pure function, defined at the file level or inside a library.
> The type specified in `using for` must be the type of all parameters and the return value.
> The only exception are comparison operators, where the return type must be `bool`.
> 
> A few points of note:
> - Being a `pure` function, the operator definition is allowed to make `pure` external calls.
> - Library functions are allowed but contract and interface functions are not.
>     This means that the definition cannot be virtual.
> - Private library functions are allowed but visible only within the library.
> - Operator definition may be a public library function.
>     External functions will eventually be allowed too
>     (see [issue #13765](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/issues/13765)).
> - Overloaded functions are not purposefully disallowed, but due to the lack of a language mechanism
>     for selecting a specific overload, it is currently not possible to use such functions.
> - Built-in functions like `keccak256`, `revert` or `abi.encode()` cannot be used even if their
>     parameter and return value types happen to match the type specified in `using for`.
> 
> The rules for `using for global` with operators are the same as for attached functions:
> it is only allowed at the file level, and the type must be defined in the current source unit and the
> effects extend to wherever the type is visible, not just the current source unit.
> 
> In the next example, library `L` is used to group functions assigned to arithmetic operators for type `Int`.
> We also add more operators, with functions `unsub` and `equals` being respectively assigned to unary `-` and comparison `=`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The operator definition must be a pure function, defined at the file level or inside a library.
The type specified in `using for` must be the type of all parameters and the return value.
The only exception are comparison operators, where the return type must be `bool`.

A few points of note:
- Being a `pure` function, the operator definition is allowed to make `pure` external calls.
- Library functions are allowed but contract and interface functions are not.
    This means that the definition cannot be virtual.
- Private library functions are allowed but visible only within the library.
- Operator definition may be a public library function.
    External functions will eventually be allowed too
    (see [issue #13765](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/issues/13765)).
- Overloaded functions are not purposefully disallowed, but due to the lack of a language mechanism
    for selecting a specific overload, it is currently not possible to use such functions.
- Built-in functions like `keccak256`, `revert` or `abi.encode()` cannot be used even if their
    parameter and return value types happen to match the type specified in `using for`.

The rules for `using for global` with operators are the same as for the attached functions:
it is only allowed at the file level, and the type must be defined in the current source unit and the
effects extend to wherever the type is visible, not just the current source unit.

In the next example, library `L` is used to group functions assigned to arithmetic operators for type `Int`.
We also add more operators, with functions `unsub` and `equals` being respectively assigned to unary `-` and comparison `=`.
```

Reviewer: This correction only applies if you're mentioning the functions here, if it's a generic thing, disregard it.

Author: Yeah, I meant "attached functions" as a general concept, not some specific functions.

1. `<<`, `>>` and `**` have non-uniform arguments.
    For built-in types, the right-hand side is always an unsigned type.
1. `=` is one of the few operators that already worked with UDVTs.
    The new feature is not meant to allow redefining existing operators so providing a custom
    definition for it will not be possible.
1. Other assignment operators, as `+=`, for example, modify their argument and return a reference.
    There are currently no references to value types in the language which makes implementing them
    directly impossible.
    It may also be desirable to have the compiler provide them automatically whenever the
    corresponding bitwise or arithmetic operator is defined on the type.
1. `++` and `--` modify their argument and also have a separate prefix and postfix variants with
    different semantics.

We are considering enabling them in one of the future releases, provided that the design issues can
be resolved satisfactorily.
There are use cases where operators like `++`, `--`, or `**` would be a natural fit, so they are
very likely to become available sooner or later.

#### Operators on Structs

> While UDVTs were the primary target, not all types can reasonably fit into a single slot.
> The way to solve this problem is to allow operators taking and returning structs.
> The main thing holding us back are the planned changes to reference types, in particular the fact
> that data location (`storage`, `memory`, etc.) is going to become a part of the type itself.
> To avoid having to introduce breaking changes later, we decided to defer support for structs until
> these changes are behind us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While UDVTs were the primary target, not all types can reasonably fit into a single slot.
The way to solve this problem is to allow operators to take and return structs.
The main thing holding us back are the planned changes to reference types, in particular the fact
that data location (`storage`, `memory`, etc.) is going to become a part of the type itself.
To avoid having to introduce breaking changes later, we decided to defer support for structs until
these changes are behind us.
```

> #### Why should you use this
> There are some advantages in defining operators for UDVTs. It allows for more expressive code where the user
> can define the exact behaviour of an operation for a desired type. Besides that, it improves maintainability
> and readability of the code. It is possible to combine several operations in a single clear expression.
> Additionally, the use of custom defined operators also provides a type-safe interface for the desired type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Why should you use this
There are some advantages to defining operators for UDVTs. It allows for more expressive code where the user
can define the exact behavior of an operation for a desired type. 
Besides that, it improves the maintainability and readability of the code. It is possible to combine several operations in a single clear expression.
Additionally, the use of custom-defined operators also provides a type-safe interface for the desired type.
```

}
```

Currently, `using for` has 3 forms:
1. `using L for T`: attaches all non-private functions from library `L` to type `T`.
1. `using L for *`: attaches all non-private functions from library `L` to any type, including types that
    cannot be named in the language and used explicitly (e.g. types of literals or array slices).
1. `using {f, g, L.h} for T`: Attaches the given free or library functions `f`, `g`, and `L.h` to type `T`.

The directive can be used:
- ✅ At the file level.
- ✅ Inside contract and library definitions.

Can not be used:
- ❌ Inside interface definitions.

When used inside contracts, it is not inherited.
Its effects extend only to the base contract that has it and not to any other contracts derived from it.

At the file level, the directive affects all the free functions, contracts and libraries defined within that file.
It does not affect other files that import the file containing it, unless it is marked as `global`.
This extends its effect to all the files where the type is visible.
The use of `global` is possible only with UDVTs, structs, and enums that are defined in the current source unit.

### Introducing User-Defined Operators

> The new feature extends the third form of the `using for` syntax, so that the function, instead of being
> attached to the type, it is instead assigned an operator symbol.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The new feature extends the third form of the `using for` syntax, so that the
function is assigned an operator symbol, instead of being attached to the type.
```

- Library functions are allowed but contract and interface functions are not.
    This means that the definition cannot be virtual.
- Private library functions are allowed but visible only within the library.
- Operator definition may be a public library function.
    External functions will eventually be allowed too
    (see [issue #13765](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/issues/13765)).
- Overloaded functions are not purposefully disallowed, but due to the lack of a language mechanism
    for selecting a specific overload, it is currently not possible to use such functions.
- Built-in functions like `keccak256`, `revert` or `abi.encode()` cannot be used even if their
    parameter and return value types happen to match the type specified in `using for`.

The rules for `using for global` with operators are the same as for attached functions:
it is only allowed at the file level, and the type must be defined in the current source unit and the
effects extend to wherever the type is visible, not just the current source unit.

In the next example, library `L` is used to group functions assigned to arithmetic operators for type `Int`.

> We also add more operators, with functions `unsub` and `equals` being respectively assigned to unary `-` and comparison `=`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We also add more operators, with functions `unsub` and `equals` being respectively assigned to unary `-` and comparison `==`.
```

---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Feature Deep-Dive: User-Defined Operators'
date: '2023-02-22'
author: Kamil Śliwak, Matheus Aguiar
category: Explainers
---

The prominent new feature in [Solidity 0.8.19](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.19)

> is the support for defining *operators* on [user defined value types](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#user-defined-value-types) (UDVTs).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is the support for defining *operators* on [user-defined value types](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#user-defined-value-types) (UDVTs).
```

If you have not been keeping up with recent features, UDVTs are a new class of types introduced in Solidity 0.8.8.

> They provide zero-cost abstraction of an elementary value type that results in a completely new type.

Reviewer 4: Personally, I'm not a fan of the weird rusticean "zero-cost abstraction" thing :-). Fine with keeping it, but I'd just say "an abstraction". But also fine with keeping it.

Author: That was actually requested by @NunoFilipeSantos in https://github.com/ethereum/solidity-blog/pull/202#discussion_r1085549651 so I just went with it and just adapted it. For me either way is fine. Changed to this now:
```
They provide an abstraction over an elementary value type that results in a completely new type.
```

> This is similar to creating an alias, but the new type is distinct from the underlying value type

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure I would say that it is similar to creating an alias, because it is not ;)
Also what do you mean by "all other UDVTs derive from it"?

Author: > I'm not sure I would say that it is similar to creating an alias, because it is not ;)

This is another thing that was suggested to me: https://github.com/ethereum/solidity-blog/pull/202#discussion_r1085549651. I mean, I know it's not an alias, which is why I reworded the original suggestion, but still, it's not like there are similarities at all. That's all it says and the later part of the sequence points out what's not similar.

> Also what do you mean by "all other UDVTs derive from it"?

All the UDVTs that use the same underlying built-in type.

---

Anyway, I'm fine with rewording it, or even removing that part of the introduction (in my original version it wasn't there anyway). What would be your suggestion for the new wording?

Reviewer 3: Oh, I thought "it" meant the new type...

Author: Changed to `derived from that underlying type`.

and all other UDVTs derived from it.
The ability to use operators is meant to bring the UDVTs closer to being as natural to use as the
built-in types and promote the use of type-safe interfaces.
Below, we are going to take a closer look into the details of this new mechanism.

### A Quick Refresher
Before we get into the details of the new feature and how it affects the language, it may be a good

> idea to first go over the two existing features that it builds upon: built-in operators and `using for`.

Reviewer 5: Can we link to the appropriate place in the docs for built-in-operators and `using-for`?

Author: They are already linked, at the beginning of each respective section.

#### Built-in operators
Solidity, like the vast majority of programming languages,
[offers a set of operators](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#operators) as syntactic sugar

> over common mathematical functions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
over common arithmetical and logical functions.
```

The difference between operators and functions is purely syntactical, and the decision

> to choose one over the other is to a large extent arbitrary.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to choose one over the other is to a large extent a matter of readability.
```

Reviewer: @chriseth I would change to indicate which one is more readable (if that's the case).

Author: @chriseth I applied the suggestion, but actually, I'm not sure I 100% agree. I think that often the decision *is* to a large degree arbitrary, or at least not always based on hard, absolute criteria.

@NunoFilipeSantos
> I would change it to indicate which one is more readable (if that's the case).

Not sure how to fit it well into the text but I tried. How about this?

```
The use of operators makes expressions more concise, which is helpful as long as they are well
understood by the reader.
```

|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Bitwise              | `&`, `\|`, `^`, `<<`, `>>`, `~`                                          |
| Arithmetic           | `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%`, `**`                                            |
| Comparison           | `==`, `!=`, `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=`                                         |
| Boolean              | `!`, `&&`, `\|\|`                                                        |
| Increment/decrement  | `++`, `--`                                                               |
| Simple assignment    | `=`                                                                      |
| Composite assignment | `+=`, `-=`, `^=`, `*=`, `/=`, `%=`, `&=`, `\|=`, `^=`, `<<=`, `>>=`      |
| Miscellaneous        | `delete`, `new`, `.`, `()`, `[]`, `?:`                                   |

Most of them require no explanation.
In some cases, however, you may be surprised by what counts as an operator.
The common infix operator, like `a + b`, that may be on your mind when you hear "operator" is

> not the only flavor operators come in.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
not the only flavour operators come in.
```
Are we using British English spelling, or have we given up on that?

Reviewer 4: Tell that to our optimiser :-).

Reviewer 5: > Tell that to our optimiser :-).

This [one](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/internals/optimizer.html)?

Reviewer 4: This one: https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/tree/develop/libyul/optimiser
Or this one: https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/develop/libevmasm/ConstantOptimiser.h
But don't start testing them (https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/develop/test/libyul/YulOptimizerTest.h)...

Reviewer 4: This one is the best: https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/develop/libyul/optimiser/OptimizerUtilities.h

Reviewer 2: > Is @matheusaaguiar gonna expand on the examples on this branch, or as part of another PR?

Added it in https://github.com/ethereum/solidity-blog/pull/202/commits/c50767711a9cfed23a8a7fb1595f5300900caa03

Author: I'm intentionally using the US spelling here because it's just a blog post I'm writing, not a part of our official docs, and it's just much easier for me to write that way. If I don't pay close attention, I automatically revert to that spelling by the sheer force of habit :)

> This one is the best: https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/develop/libyul/optimiser/OptimizerUtilities.h

Well, it's just very inconsistent. It was very frustrating when I first worked with the optimizer and tried to stick to British spelling :) I eventually just gave up because it was already beyond repair.

The last row of the table has items that to some users may not seem operator-like at all.

> `delete` and `new`  are in fact operators, and follow precedence and associativity rules despite not being symbols.

Reviewer 3: Do we need to go into so much detail here?

Author: The whole section is kinda obvious if you know Solidity well, and is meant mostly for people who are not that familiar with Solidity (or even any other language). I thought it could be interesting to that part of the audience.

Also, I think that showing how weird these operators are makes it clearer why the set of definable operators is so limited, and why we did not decide to allow redefining every single operator.

But it's not essential. I'll remove it.

> `delete` and `new`  are in fact operators, and follow precedence and associativity rules despite not being symbols.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`delete` and `new` are in fact operators and follow precedence and associativity rules despite not being symbols.
```

Author: Removed this paragraph due to this suggestion: https://github.com/ethereum/solidity-blog/pull/202#discussion_r1113390948

> Member access via `.`, subscripting arrays with `[]`, or making a function call by adding parentheses
> to a function can be thought of as applications of operators as well.
> Even putting something in parentheses creates a valid operator expression.
> 
> It is important to note that in many languages assignment is a statement that is handled specially.
> In Solidity, like in the C-like languages it took inspiration from, assignment can be freely used in
> expressions on par with other operators.
> 
> In most cases built-in operators are only defined for [value types](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#value-types).
> Notable exceptions are the simple assignment and the "miscellaneous" group.
> For example, you can put almost anything in parentheses or branches of the ternary operator, as a part
> of a bigger expression, even if its type cannot be named or even assigned to anything.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Member access via `.`, subscripting arrays with `[]`, or making a function call by adding parentheses
to a function can be thought of as applications of operators as well.
Even putting something in parentheses creates a valid operator expression.

It is important to note that in many languages, an assignment is a statement that is handled specially.
In Solidity, like in the C-like languages it took inspiration from, an assignment can be freely used in
expressions on par with other operators.

In most cases, built-in operators are only defined for [value types](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#value-types).
Notable exceptions are the simple assignment and the "miscellaneous" group.
For example, you can put almost anything in parentheses or branches of the ternary operator as a part
of a bigger expression, even if its type cannot be named or even assigned to anything.
```

#### `using for`

> Since operators are a purely syntactic element, you can always use ordinary functions as a substitute.

Author: > I would have thought the ordinary functions are free functions without "using for". 

Well, it's any function. I mean, you can just call a function anywhere where you'd use an operator and often you have many kinds of functions to choose from. Changed to just `a function`.

> Maybe we should not compare the existing "using for" with operators but rather explain it in isolation?

I'd prefer to keep it that way, because really the main reason I added it is because of operators and I wanted to underscore the elements that make them similar in some ways.

[`using for`](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/contracts.html#using-for).

The directive `using ... for ...` can be used to attach functions to a type.
These functions can then be used as members on any object of that type and receive the object as
their first parameter.

```solidity
pragma solidity ^0.8.13;

type Int is int;
using {add} for Int global;

function add(Int a, Int b) pure returns (Int) {
    return Int.wrap(Int.unwrap(a) + Int.unwrap(b));
}

function test(Int a, Int b) pure returns (Int) {
    return a.add(b);
}
```

Currently, `using for` has 3 forms:
1. `using L for T`: attaches all non-private functions from library `L` to type `T`.
1. `using L for *`: attaches all non-private functions from library `L` to any type, including types that
    cannot be named in the language and used explicitly (e.g. types of literals or array slices).
1. `using {f, L.g, ...} for T`: attaches given free or library functions `f`, `L.g`, ... to type `T`.

The directive can be used:
- ✅ At the file level.
- ✅ Inside contract and library definitions.

Can not be used:
- ❌ Inside interface definitions.

When used inside contracts, it is not inherited.

> Its effects extend only to the base contract that has it and not to any other contracts derived from it.

Reviewer 3: "base contract" might be confusing here talking about inheritance.

At the file level, the directive affects all the free functions, contracts and libraries defined within that file.
It does not affect other files that import the file containing it, unless it is marked as `global`.

> `global` extends its effect to all files where the type is visible.

Reviewer 3: Also to files where it is invisible. It is usable on all expressions of that type, it does not matter that the type is visible via name.

Reviewer 3: I mean this is the same with contracts already: Functions on a contract can be called on all expressions of that contract type, you do not need the type of the contract visible.

Author: Very good point. I did not think of that. Changed to just `all files`.

The use of `global` is possible only with UDVTs, structs, and enums that are defined in its source unit.

### Introducing User-Defined Operators
The new feature extends the third form of the `using for` syntax to allow binding operators to functions.
The function is invoked whenever the operator is used on the values of the type:

```solidity
pragma solidity ^0.8.19;

type Int is int;
using {add as +} for Int global;

function add(Int a, Int b) pure returns (Int) {
    return Int.wrap(Int.unwrap(a) + Int.unwrap(b));
}

function test(Int a, Int b) pure returns (Int) {
    return a + b; // Equivalent to add(a, b)
}
```

> An operator can only be bound in a `global` directive and the definition must be a `pure` free function.

Reviewer 4: Here it would actually be nice to justify this a bit more. I.e. the primary use case for this is type libraries that build up a complete type that should always work the same everywhere and we don't have meanings of operators to depend on more than the operator types (i.e. not on scopes, etc.) to avoid pitfalls. Something along those lines :-).

Author: Yeah, I go into that more in the section on auditing. I generally tried to avoid too much detail in the intro section and initially had that in more specific sections instead. Now those sections are mostly gone though, as the one on auditing turned out to be a good place to list all the important corner cases in a natural way.

> The type specified in `using for` must be a user-defined value type and must be the type

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The type specified in `using for` must be a user-defined value type defined in the same file (as is always the case when using `global`) and must be the type
```

Author: I intentionally did not go into the consequences of making it global here. I wanted this bit to be concise and go to into more details in later sections. Currently the section on auditing lists corner cases and explains the consequences of this a bit more.

of all the parameters of the function and its return value.

> The only exception are comparison operators, where the return type must be `bool`.

Reviewer 4: Similar to the docs in the actual PR, I'd prefer to say that each operator has a unique signature and to list them... but if you think that table is too much for here, we can keep it like this.

Author: I think it's fine in the context of a blog post. It's an accurate summary of the current situation and the post is written from the perspective of this point in time, no one will expect it to be updated with the language.

And yeah, I think including the whole table would make it too long (the post is already very long). I really want this bit to be concise.

Reviewer 4: My problem is that to me the phrasing suggests a conceptually wrong view on the operators :-). There is only one global comparison operator. It's always the same. It always returns ``bool``. You just implement it for types.
The current phrasing suggests that you have multiple unrelated operators flying around and then impose restrictions on their types.
Of course, in the end observationally the result is the same, but it's quite different conceptualizations.

Reviewer 4: But yeah, as I said originally, we can keep it, if need be :-).

Author: > The current phrasing suggests that you have multiple unrelated operators flying around and then impose restrictions on their types.
Of course, in the end observationally the result is the same, but it's quite different conceptualizations.

Fair enough. What if I say `comparison operator definitions`? Because that's what I really meant. I probably should have been more precise about this. Currently you *can* have "multiple unrelated operator *definitions* flying around".

Since currently there are no implicit conversions allowed to and from UDVTs, user-defined operators
must always be invoked with exact types.

The following operators can be defined:
| Category   | Operators                        |
|------------|----------------------------------|
| Bitwise    | `&`, `\|`, `^`,  `~`             |
| Arithmetic | `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%`          |
| Comparison | `==`, `!=`, `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=` |

Of the operators listed above, `~` is unary, `-` can be both unary and binary and the rest is always binary.

> Note that Solidity does not have unary `+`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that Solidity does not have a unary `+`.
```

Unary and binary `-` are considered different operators and need separate definitions.

> It is not possible to redefine built-in operators.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It is not possible to redefine the operators on built-in types.
```

Author: No, I do mean built-in operators here. For example `=` or `()` do work on UDVTs but you cannot redefine them.

Reviewer 4: This is still very misleading :-). `+` is a builtin operator... I mean, it's true that you can't redefine it, but you're thinking of it like that's what *is* allowed, don't you?

Author: How about this?
```
It is not possible to replace operator definitions.
This applies both to the built-in operator definitions provided by the compiler and to operators
bound to a function provided by the user.
Once the operator is bound, the definition cannot be changed.
```

> All valid cases are the ones where previously there was no built-in operator.

Reviewer 4: Not sure I understand this, resp. whether this is true - what do you mean here? It's not like we can define operators everywhere where we didn't have an operator before...

Author: I mean that it is possible to define an operator for a type only if the compiler does not already provide a built-in operator for that case. But I agree that it could be worded better. How about this?

```
An operator can be defined by the user only when there is no built-in operator already provided by the compiler.
```

Reviewer 4: Yeah, better, but why not be actually precise? Operators can only be defined on user-defined types, not on builtin types, period.

Author: Because the thing I want to emphasize is that you cannot redefine built-in operators.

As such, only one definition is allowed for each user-defined operator for a given type.
As long as the definition stays the same, it is not an error to repeat the `using for` directive,

> just as it is not an error to attach the same function to a type twice.

Reviewer 3: Maybe we should say: Whether `-` refers to the unary or binary variant depends on the number of parameters of the function.

> just as it is not an error to attach the same function to a type twice.

Reviewer 4: I don't think this is relevant - this is a fluke of our analysis, not a feature.

Author: ok, I guess I can remove it.

> just as it is not an error to attach the same function to a type twice.

Author: > Maybe it would be nice to have an example how to bind both unary and binary minus.

Yeah, I actually suggested to @matheusaaguiar to include it in his bigger example but I see it's not there. I'll try to work it into it somehow.

> Maybe we should say: Whether `-` refers to the unary or binary variant depends on the number of parameters of the function.

Good point. Added.

#### Operator Bindings vs Attached Functions

> User-defined operators are independent from attached functions.
> One can be done without the other, and both can be done at the same time, even in the same `using for` directive.
> 
> The following example illustrates this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User-defined operators are independent of attached functions.
One can be done without the other, and both can be done simultaneously, even in the same `using for` directive.

The following example illustrates this:
```

```solidity
pragma solidity ^0.8.19;

type Int is int;
using {add as +} for Int global;
using {sub as -, sub} for Int global;

function add(Int a, Int b) pure returns (Int) {
    return Int.wrap(Int.unwrap(a) + Int.unwrap(b));
}

function sub(Int a, Int b) pure returns (Int) {
    return Int.wrap(Int.unwrap(a) + Int.unwrap(b));
}

function test(Int x, Int y) pure {
    x + y;
    x.add(y); // ERROR: Member "add" not found or not visible after argument-dependent lookup in Int.

    x - y;
    x.sub(y); // OK -- "sub" was also attached in "using for"
}
```

> In the above example, the function `add()` is used *only* as the operator `+`, and not callable as `x.add()`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the above example, the function `add()` is used *only* as the operator `+`, and not callable as `x.add()` (but it can of course be called like `add(x, y)`).
```

`sub()`, on the other hand, can both be used as the operator `-` and called on the type.

The rules for `using for global` with operators are the same as for attached functions (with an additional restriction that operators *must* be global):

> it is only allowed at the file level, and the type must be defined in the current source unit and the

Reviewer 4: ``only allowed at file level``

Also what's the "current" source unit? You mean the source unit of the type it applies to, right? Any statement is always located in its current source unit :-).

Author: ok, good point. Changed to
```
it is only allowed at file level, the type must be defined in the same file and it makes
the operator available everywhere.
```

effects extend to wherever the type is visible, not just the current source unit.

> #### More Examples

Reviewer 3: Maybe we should also mention that `using for` needs to be in the same file but the functions that we are attaching can be imported from somewhere else - at least that was a question in the forum.

Author: Added a mention. This case is also covered by the example added by @matheusaaguiar.

    return UncheckedCounter.unwrap(x) < UncheckedCounter.unwrap(y);
}

contract C {
    uint internalCounter = 12;

    function testCounter() public returns (uint) {
        for (
            UncheckedCounter i = UncheckedCounter.wrap(12);
            i < UncheckedCounter.wrap(20);
            i = i + ONE
        )
            ++internalCounter;

        return internalCounter;
    }
}
```

### AST Changes
The new feature introduces two new attributes to the Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) produced by the compiler:
1. `functionList` on `UsingForDirective` nodes can now contain operator entries of the following structure:
    ```json
    {
        "operator": "+",
        "definition": { /* function */ }
    }
    ```
    in addition to the current entries for functions that are structured as follows:
    ```json
    {
        "function": { /* function */ }
    }
    ```
1. `BinaryOperation` and `UnaryOperation` nodes may now have a `function` attribute.
    If present, the attribute indicates that the operation is actually an invocation of a user-defined
    operator and specifies the ID of the function used to define it.

> This effectively introduces a new way to perform a function call, not represented by a `FunctionCall` node.
> This will affect any tool that needs to detect and follow function calls, for example, to build a
> control flow graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This effectively introduces a new way to perform a function call not represented by a `FunctionCall` node.
This will affect any tool that needs to detect and follow function calls, such as building a
control flow graph.
```

Author: It does not sound correct to me. After the change the second sentence does not really connect with the first one, it refers to a different subject. Not sure how to reword it to make this suggestion work - the way I'd do it is really how I did it already.

### Design Rationale

#### Why Does Solidity Need User-Defined Operators?
The support for user-defined value types in Solidity cannot be considered complete without more natural
ways to operate on them.
The ability to use operators was envisioned from the beginning, and the main reason it was not provided
immediately was the uncertainty regarding interactions with other features we plan to introduce.
We decided that it was best to release the feature in a minimal usable state and extend it over time,
taking into account user feedback.

UDVTs in general were meant to fulfill two needs:
1. More type-safety when performing operations on values of the same underlying value type that express
    conceptually different things.

>     For example quantities of different tokens could both be stored as `uint` but adding them without

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    For example quantities of different tokens or with different dimensions could both be stored as `uint` but adding them without
```

    an explicit conversion is a mistake that can only be prevented if the compiler knows that they
    are values of different kinds.

1. The ability to define new types using value types as the underlying representation.
    The best example of this are fixed-point types.

>     Fixed-point types were originally going to be an integral part of the language, and the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Fixed-point types were originally planned to be an integral part of the language, and the
```

    partially implemented [`ufixed` and `fixed`](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#fixed-point-numbers)
    types are the vestiges of that old design.

>     While trying to agree on the final design for the feature, however, we realized that no implementation
>     is going to be a trade-off good enough for most situations and cannot become a suitable default choice.
>     We decided to leave the choice up to library authors and instead focus on providing primitives
>     necessary to build their own fixed-point types that feel like a native type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    While trying to agree on the final design for the feature, however, we realized that no implementation
    will be a good enough trade-off for most situations and cannot become a suitable choice by default.
    We decided to leave the choice up to library authors and instead focus on providing primitives
    necessary to build their own fixed-point types that feel like native types.
```

Author: Changed, except `suitable choice by default`, which is not quite what I meant. I did mean the "default choice", i.e. a fixed point implementation that is the default one in the language.

> #### Will User-Defined Operators Make Auditing Harder?

Reviewer 3: I think we should stress the advantages of operators a bit more, i.e. readability of `x * t + y * z` as opposed to `x.mul(t).add(y.mul(z))`

Author: Added an example to show off the readability.

What else should I mention?

In the feedback we received so far one of the most common concerns is the effect of the feature on contract
auditing and potential to mask malicious code.

> I want to address these concerns here.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We want to address these concerns here.
```

> First of all, any new syntax increases the complexity of the language and has some potential to make code more obscure
> and harder to understand when abused.
> It cannot be completely avoided and is always a trade-off between all the good and bad ways it can be used.
> We think that improving the ergonomics of UDVTs is important enough that it outweights any of the downsides we considered.
> 
> It is important to realize the actual scope of the feature.
> You may be imagining an elaborate system from languages like C++, with complicated rules and many corner cases.
> As implemented now the feature is deliberately very limited.
> We tried to both limit surprises and avoid prematurely adding support for cases that we have not carefully thought out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First of all, any new syntax increases the complexity of the language and has some potential to make code more obscure
and harder to understand when abused.
It cannot be completely avoided and is always a trade-off between all the good and bad ways it can be used.
We think that improving the ergonomics of UDVTs is important enough that it outweighs any of the downsides we considered.

It is essential to realize the actual scope of the feature.
You may imagine an elaborate system from languages like C++, with complicated rules and many corner cases.
As implemented now the feature is deliberately very limited.
We tried to both limit surprises and avoided prematurely adding support for cases that we have not carefully thought out.
```

> In the current implementation it is not possible to:
> 
> 1. Have operators on types other than UDVTs.
>     - User-defined operators on [reference types](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#reference-types)
>       like structs or arrays are not allowed.
>     - It is not possible to define them on built-in value types, function types or enums.
>     - You cannot define them to unnamed types using the type wildcard (`*`).
> 1. Have operators that are not `pure`.
>     Operators cannot modify storage.
>     They can at most make pure external calls.
> 
>     The worst that is technically possible with tricks is for them to modify memory (only through inline assembly)
>     or make staticcalls (through interfaces that do not match actual code deployed on chain).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the current implementation, it is not possible to:

1. Have operators on types other than UDVTs.
    - User-defined operators on [reference types](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#reference-types)
      like structs or arrays are not allowed.
    - It is not possible to define them on built-in value types, function types or enums.
    - You cannot define them to unnamed types using the type wildcard (`*`).
1. Have operators that are not `pure`.
    Operators cannot modify storage.
    They can, at most, make pure external calls.

    The worst that is technically possible with tricks is for them to modify memory (only through inline assembly)
    or make staticcalls (through interfaces that do not match actual code deployed on-chain).
```

Author: Is `on-chain` actually correct here? I mean it's deployed on the chain, not using it as an adjective.

In any case, I reworded the sentence to remove the word :)

> 1. Have operators on mixed types.
>     Parameter and return value types of operators must be the same.
>     Also, no implicit conversions are possible, so it is very simple to determine if a particular operation
>     will invoke a user-define operator or a built-in one (just look at the type).
> 1. Redefine operators.
>     You cannot replace any of the built-in operators with a custom definition.
>     For user-defined operators, only one definition can be provided.
> 1. Bind operators to contract functions.
>     This also means that operator definitions cannot be inherited, virtual or remain unimplemented.
> 1. Bind operators to overloaded functions.
> 1. Use built-in functions to define operators.
>     You cannot e.g. bind an operator directly to `keccak256()`.
> 1. Change precedence or associativity of an operator.
> 1. Define any of the operators with more complex semantics.
>     You cannot define:
>     - `&&` and `||` due to their short-circuiting behavior.
>     - `++` and `--` because they modify their argument and also have separate prefix and postfix variants with different semantics.
>     - `+=`, `-=`, `^=`, `*=`, `/=`, `%=`, `&=`, `\|=`, `^=`, `<<=`, `>>=` because they modify their argument.
>     - `=`, `()`, `?:` and `.` because they are built-in for all types.
>     - `delete`, `new` and `[]` because they are not usable with UDVTs.
> 1. Define custom operators that do not exist in the language, like `===` or unary `+`.
> 1. Bind operators in bulk or accidentally.
>     The `using L for T` syntax for attaching a whole library to a type does not cover operators.
>     Operators must always be bound explicitly.
> 
> In addition to these restrictions, we decided to limit them even more in response to feedback we received before releasing Solidity 0.8.18.
> This means you cannot also:
> 1. Use library functions to define operators.
>     This excludes external, public and private functions.
>     It is also now impossible to apply modifiers to operators because free functions cannot have them.
> 1. Have non-global operators, which has several consequenes:
>     - Operators can only be bound in the file that also defines the type.
>         They are available wherever the type is available and cannot have different definitions in different scopes.
>     - Local bindings at contract level are not possible (i.e. inside contracts and libraries).
>         This also makes it impossible to define operators for local types that are defined inside contracts or libraries.
> 1. Define `!`, `<<`, `>>` and `**`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Have operators on mixed types.
    Parameter and return value types of operators must be the same.
    Also, no implicit conversions are possible, so it is very simple to determine if a particular operation
    will invoke a user-define operator or a built-in one (just look at the type).
1. Redefine operators.
    You cannot replace any of the built-in operators with a custom definition.
    For user-defined operators, only one definition can be provided.
1. Bind operators to contract functions.
    This also means that operator definitions cannot be inherited, virtual, or remain unimplemented.
1. Bind operators to overloaded functions.
1. Use built-in functions to define operators.
    You cannot e.g. bind an operator directly to `keccak256()`.
1. Change the precedence or associativity of an operator.
1. Define any of the operators with more complex semantics.
    You cannot define:
    - `&&` and `||` due to their short-circuiting behavior.
    - `++` and `--` because they modify their argument and also have separate prefix and postfix variants with different semantics.
    - `+=`, `-=`, `^=`, `*=`, `/=`, `%=`, `&=`, `\|=`, `^=`, `<<=`, `>>=` because they modify their argument.
    - `=`, `()`, `?:` and `.` because they are built-in for all types.
    - `delete`, `new`, and `[]` because they are not usable with UDVTs.
1. Define custom operators that do not exist in the language, like `===` or unary `+`.
1. Bind operators in bulk or accidentally.
    The `using L for T` syntax for attaching a whole library to a type does not cover operators.
    Operators must always be bound explicitly.

In addition to these restrictions, we decided to limit them even more in response to feedback we received before releasing Solidity 0.8.18.
This means you cannot also:
1. Use library functions to define operators.
    This excludes external, public, and private functions.
    It is also now impossible to apply modifiers to operators because free functions cannot have them.
1. Have non-global operators, which has several consequences:
    - Operators can only be bound in the file that also defines the type.
        They are available wherever the type is available and cannot have different definitions in different scopes.
    - Local bindings at the contract level are impossible (i.e. inside contracts and libraries).
        This also makes it impossible to define operators for local types that are defined inside contracts or libraries.
1. Define `!`, `<<`, `>>` and `**`.
```

Author: > the contract level

https://github.com/ethereum/solidity-blog/pull/202#discussion_r1113401728
> only allowed at file level

I'm getting contradictory suggestions here :) Which one is it?

`at contract level`/`at file level` sounds more correct to me because I'm not referring to any particular file or contract. I'm basically using it as an adjective.

> We will definitely lift *some* of these restrictions in the future, but we will consider every case carefully.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We may *some* of these restrictions in the future, but we will consider every case carefully.
```

:-)

For built-in types behavior cannot be altered at all.
For UDVTs any operator must necessarily be user-defined so seeing it is not much different from
seeing a function call.
In both cases the name may be misleading and a look at the definition may be necessary.
An operator can have only one definition, the definition must be explicitly bound in the file that
defines the type and cannot be shadowed.

### The Future of User-Defined Operators and UDVTs
Now that we know the new feature and its limitations, the  question on everyone's mind is probably
"Will it stay that way?".
How will the feature evolve in the short and long term?

#### Literal Suffixes
The very next step for UDVTs is the ability to provide custom literals of user-defined value types.
The ease of using literal values in expressions is a big part of what makes a type feel native.
Solidity already provides fractional literals and our intention is to make them usable with custom
fixed-point number implementations.
To achieve that we are going to allow defining suffix functions that return UDVT by converting
literals that are already available in the language:

```solidity

> type UFixed16x2 is uint16;

Reviewer 3: Maybe we should use at least 128 bits, which is the common example.

function uf(int16 mantissa, uint8 exponent) pure suffix returns (UFixed16x2) { ... }
```
```solidity
UFixed16x2 circumference = 2 uf * 3.14 uf * radius;
```

While the application of a suffix will involve a function call, eventually, with the help of
compile-time evaluation, literal suffixes are going to become as efficient as native literals.

#### More Operators
Many operators have been excluded from the initial implementation.
Some of them will very likely be user-definable at some point.

1. `<<`, `>>` and `**` were excluded due to their non-uniform arguments.
    For built-in types, the right-hand side is always an unsigned type.
1.  `!` was excluded because we have to decide whether it should return the same type as the argument

>     of just `bool`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    or just `bool`.
```

    We are leaning towards the latter, but it needs more consideration.
1. `++` and `--` are very convenient, and we want to have them eventually.
    They just need to be handled in a special way, and there is more than way to do so.
1. Composite assignment operators, such as `+=`, will likely be provided automatically
    in the future as long as the corresponding arithmetic/bitwise operator is available.
    Allowing a direct implementation is currently not impossible anyway, because there are no references

>     to value types in the language.

Reviewer 4: I guess that was supposed to be "not possible" instead of "not impossible" :-)? Also generally a lot of conjecture again, we may also still decide to let them be freely implemented - but fine with keeping it here.

Author: > I guess that was supposed to be "not possible" instead of "not impossible" :-)?

Yes :)

Author: I know it's not certain, that's why it's not worded more strongly. It's not like we're promising this, it's just an overview of what *might* happen as far as we can tell today.

1. We are considering adding a C++-like
    ["spaceship operator"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three-way_comparison#High-level_languages),
    i.e. `<=>`.
    When defined, the compiler could use it to automatically generate all the other comparison operators.

On the other hand, it is unlikely that we will allow redefining some other operators:

1. `&&` and `||` are not necessary for most UDVTs because user-defined comparison operators
    must return `bool`, for which the built-in boolean operators are sufficient.
    The additional complication is their short-circuiting behavior that may or may not be
    appropriate, depending on the semantics of a particular UDVT.

> 1. `=` is already provided by the compiler for all types and it is very unlikely that we will ever allow redefining it.

Reviewer 4: This is a *lot* of conjecture again... not sure we'll have a spaceship operators, not sure we *won't* have boolean conjunction and disjunction... does any of this information really help?

Also the last enumeration has two ``1.``s :-).

Author: Well, it's worded hypothetically. The conjecture is the point. It's just a blog post, we can afford to speculate. It's not like we're making binding promises here.

I think that talking about these things more in the open will help get us more feedback. It puts the ideas out here, people can react to them.

Author: So, is any of this actually wrong (not just unlikely?). Or is there are more likely alternative. Feel free to rewrite bits that you think are too far out there. Honestly, it's also a way for me to get these ideas out of you and @chriseth :)

Reviewer 4: Just remove it, there's no value in engaging in hypotheticals here.

Reviewer 4: And yes, we should have and should talk about this stuff more up front, but let's keep the post clean of hypotheticals.

Author: The whole section about the future of operators removed.

#### Operators on Reference Types
While UDVTs were the primary target, not all types can reasonably fit into a single slot.

> The way to solve this problem is to allow operators taking and returning structs.

Reviewer 4: Not sure this tracks. Maybe it's easier to say that we're providing a minimal viable implementation for UDVTs first and consider extending it in the future? We'll probably have multi-stack-slot non-reference types and the way to solve the multi-slot thing is probably *not* always memory structs, etc. :-).

Author: How about this?

```
#### Operators on Complex Types
While UDVTs were the primary target, in some cases it may also be reasonable to build a custom type
with a more complex underlying representation, such as a struct or a dynamic array.
The main thing holding us back here are upcoming changes to the type system that are a significant part
of our roadmap for the near future.
To avoid having to introduce breaking changes later, we decided to defer support for such operators until
these changes are behind us.
```

Author: The whole section about the future of operators removed.

The main thing holding us back are the planned changes to reference types, in particular the fact
that [data location](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#data-location) is going to
become a part of the type itself.
 To avoid having to introduce breaking changes later, we decided to defer support for structs until
these changes are behind us.

We want to eventually support operators on other reference types, but it is likely that this usage will
require naming them, using some kind of yet-to-be-introduced user-defined reference type feature similar

> to UDVTs, or at least defining a type alias.

Reviewer 4: This is a bit much conjecturing... it's equally possible that we allow user-defined operators on structs themselves, so I'd just skip this part.

Author: Removed.

#### Operators on Mixed Types
Inability to define operators with arguments of different types is somewhat constraining and lifting this
limitation is also a part of our vision for UDVTs.
There are, however, multiple ways to achieve this, and explicitly defining an operator for every type combination
is only one of them.
Other possibilities involve generics specialized with traits or having implicit conversions.

This part will unfortunately have to wait until we are done with the changes to the type system that are on our current roadmap.
Doing them before would only result in something that would limit our design choices, and would have to be discarded

> in a breaking release.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure this is true :-). Mixed type operators are a significant problem for type inference, so I'm not sure we'll ever want to have them.

I think it would be better to be very conservative on this and merely state that the first version we're releasing is a minimal viable implementation that will definitely not cause problems if considered as part of a generic type system or trait system with type inference without making any promises or talking about mixed operators as part of a vision, which they aren't necessarily.

Author: How about this?

```
Inability to apply operators to values of different types is somewhat constraining and lifting this
limitation is something we would like to address eventually, though it is not yet clear in what form.
There are multiple ways to achieve this.
Explicitly defining an operator for every type combination is just one of them, and not necessarily the most elegant.
For the time being, we can only say that the feature we are releasing is a minimal viable implementation
that will definitely not cause problems if considered as part of a generic type system or trait system
with type inference.
```

But I'm not sure I understand what you mean. Are you saying that ending up without operators that work on more than one type is an real possibility? I thought we wanted to allow that, one way or another. I.e. the classic example of adding `Timestamp` and `Duration` that @chriseth often brings up. That has to be possible eventually, doesn't it?

Author: The whole section about the future of operators removed.

Reviewer 4: I swayed @chriseth away from it by now :-). Please don't promise mixed operators in any way, we'll likely never have them and it will be hard to explain to people why already, since it's a type-theoretic problem of the ambiguity of type inference that's at stake here that's not so easy to convey.

#### What Will Not Change?
Due to concerns about the safety of the feature, there are some key elements that are very unlikely to ever change regarding operators.
Operators will likely always be global and defined at file level with free functions.

> In terms of side-effects, they will stay `pure`.

Reviewer 4: That's probably false.

Author: Oh, interesting. I know it's possible but I thought it's a very remote possibility, to the point that it would be reasonable to say this.

Also, non-pure operators do not seem to be useful enough to be worth considering.

In any case, removed that part.

Reviewer 4: Once you have *any* operator on types in storage they're no longer pure, that's no exactly exotic :-).

---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Feature Deep-Dive: User-Defined Operators'
date: '2023-02-22'
author: Kamil Śliwak, Matheus Aguiar
category: Explainers
---

> The prominent new feature in [Solidity 0.8.19](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.19)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The most notable new feature in [Solidity 0.8.19](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.19)
```
might sound better, but just a recommendation

Reviewer: I agree that prominent does not do it justice, but @franzihei 's alternative made it too wordy.
I would say this feature is a highlight of the release by calling it "The outstanding feature in..."

Author: `most notable` does sound better to me. `outstanding` not so much.

But `highlight` actually sounds even better. How about `The highlight of Solidity 0.8.19 is ...`?

> is the support for defining *operators* on [user-defined value types](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#user-defined-value-types) (UDVTs).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
is support for defining *operators* on [user-defined value types](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#user-defined-value-types) (UDVTs).
```

Reviewer: The article "the" is correct. 🤔

Reviewer 6: for me it sounded weird but you might be right here 👍

If you have not been keeping up with recent features, UDVTs are a new class of types introduced in Solidity 0.8.8.
They provide an abstraction over an elementary value type that results in a completely new type.
This is similar to creating an alias, but the new type is distinct from the underlying value type
and all other UDVTs derived from that underlying type.
The ability to use operators is meant to bring the UDVTs closer to being as natural to use as the
built-in types and promote the use of type-safe interfaces.
Below, we are going to take a closer look into the details of this new mechanism.

### A Quick Refresher
Before we get into the details of the new feature and how it affects the language, it may be a good
idea to first go over the two existing features that it builds upon: built-in operators and `using for`.

> #### Built-in operators

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
#### Built-in Operators
```

Keeping capitalisation consistent in all titles

understood by the reader.
What is included in that set varies widely from language to language.

Here is the full list for Solidity:

| Category             | Operators                                                                |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Bitwise              | `&`, `\|`, `^`, `<<`, `>>`, `~`                                          |
| Arithmetic           | `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%`, `**`                                            |
| Comparison           | `==`, `!=`, `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=`                                         |
| Boolean              | `!`, `&&`, `\|\|`                                                        |
| Increment/decrement  | `++`, `--`                                                               |
| Simple assignment    | `=`                                                                      |
| Composite assignment | `+=`, `-=`, `^=`, `*=`, `/=`, `%=`, `&=`, `\|=`, `^=`, `<<=`, `>>=`      |
| Miscellaneous        | `delete`, `new`, `.`, `()`, `[]`, `?:`                                   |

> It is important to note that in many languages, an assignment is a statement that is handled specially.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
It is important to note that in many languages, an assignment is a statement that is handled uniquely.
```

"Specially" sounds odd to me - maybe rather ``uniquely`` or ``distinctively``?

Author: Odd, it sounded fine to me. I think I see it quite often. It's `uniquely` and `distinctively` that seem off to me in this context :)

But `in a special way` is good. I will change to that.

Solidity has a mechanism that is often used this way:
[`using for`](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/contracts.html#using-for).

The directive `using ... for ...` can be used to attach functions to a type.
These functions can then be used as members on any object of that type and receive the object as
their first parameter.

```solidity
pragma solidity ^0.8.13;

type Int is int;
using {add} for Int global;

function add(Int a, Int b) pure returns (Int) {
    return Int.wrap(Int.unwrap(a) + Int.unwrap(b));
}

function test(Int a, Int b) pure returns (Int) {
    return a.add(b);
}
```

Currently, `using for` has 3 forms:
1. `using L for T`: attaches all non-private functions from library `L` to type `T`.
1. `using L for *`: attaches all non-private functions from library `L` to any type, including types that
    cannot be named in the language and used explicitly (e.g. types of literals or array slices).
1. `using {f, L.g, ...} for T`: attaches given free or library functions `f`, `L.g`, ... to type `T`.

The directive can be used:
- ✅ At file level.
- ✅ Inside contract and library definitions.

> Can not be used:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The directive can not be used:
```

    return BaseToken.wrap(BaseToken.unwrap(x) * BaseToken.unwrap(y));
}
function divBase(BaseToken x, BaseToken y) pure returns (BaseToken) {
    return BaseToken.wrap(BaseToken.unwrap(x) / BaseToken.unwrap(y));
}
function ltBase(BaseToken x, BaseToken y) pure returns (bool) {
    return BaseToken.unwrap(x) < BaseToken.unwrap(y);
}
```

### AST Changes
The new feature introduces two new attributes to the Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) produced by the compiler:
1. `functionList` on `UsingForDirective` nodes can now contain operator entries of the following structure:
    ```json
    {
        "operator": "+",
        "definition": { /* function */ }
    }
    ```
    in addition to the current entries for functions that are structured as follows:
    ```json
    {
        "function": { /* function */ }
    }
    ```
1. `BinaryOperation` and `UnaryOperation` nodes may now have a `function` attribute.
    If present, the attribute indicates that the operation is actually an invocation of a user-defined
    operator and specifies the ID of the function used to define it.

This effectively introduces a new way to perform a function call not represented by a `FunctionCall` node.

> This will affect any tool that needs to detect and follow function calls, for example, to build a

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
It will affect any tool that needs to detect and follow function calls, for example, to build a
```
repetition of "this"

1. Bind operators to overloaded functions.
1. Use built-in functions to define operators.
    You cannot e.g. bind an operator directly to `keccak256()`.
1. Change the precedence or associativity of an operator.
1. Define any of the operators with more complex semantics.
    You cannot define:
    - `&&` and `||` due to their short-circuiting behavior.
    - `++` and `--` because they modify their argument and also have separate prefix and postfix variants with different semantics.
    - `+=`, `-=`, `^=`, `*=`, `/=`, `%=`, `&=`, `\|=`, `^=`, `<<=`, `>>=` because they modify their argument.
    - `=`, `()`, `?:`, and `.` because they are built-in for all types.
    - `delete`, `new`, and `[]` because they are not usable with UDVTs.
1. Define custom operators that do not exist in the language, like `===` or unary `+`.
1. Bind operators in bulk or accidentally.
    The `using L for T` syntax for attaching a whole library to a type does not cover operators.
    Operators must always be bound explicitly.

In addition to these restrictions, we decided to limit them even more in response to feedback we received before releasing Solidity 0.8.18.

> This means you cannot also:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This means you also cannot:
```

}

contract C {
    uint internalCounter = 12;

    function testCounter() public returns (uint) {
        for (
            UncheckedCounter i = UncheckedCounter.wrap(12);
            i < UncheckedCounter.wrap(20);
            i = i + ONE
        )
            ++internalCounter;

        return internalCounter;
    }
}
```

##### Token Conversion
This is a more complex example that shows multiple aspects of user-defined operators.
The `TokenConversion` contract holds balances of two different tokens, defined as UDVTs,
and uses a third type as a common denominator for calculations.

`TokenConversion.sol`
```solidity
pragma solidity ^0.8.19;

import {TokenA, TokenB, BaseToken, ZERO, ONE} from "./Tokens.sol";

contract TokenConversion {
    mapping(address account => TokenA balance) public balanceOfTokenA;
    mapping(address account => TokenB balance) public balanceOfTokenB;

    BaseToken averageDepositSize = ZERO;
    BaseToken numberOfDeposits = ZERO;

    function deposit(address receiver, TokenA amount) public {
        balanceOfTokenA[receiver] = balanceOfTokenA[receiver] + amount;
        BaseToken depositSize = amount.toBase();

>         averageDepositSize = (numberOfDeposits * averageDepositSize + depositSize) / (numberOfDeposits + ONE);

Author: The bad thing about this is that UDVTs should allow us to avoid using the same type for a plain number and a deposit size. I don't see who we can do better though. We can't have operators on mixed types.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I felt that need (operators on mixed types) here.

Author: One thing you could do would be to use attached functions in places where you would use such operators. We should actually show that off for `exp()`.

Reviewer 2: I replaced the `+ ONE` operation with an attached function `increment`. 
Not sure how we would show that for `**`... or do you mean, we should come up with some function that makes use of `**` for UDVTs?

        numberOfDeposits = numberOfDeposits + ONE;
    }

    function averageDepositSizeAsTokenA() public view returns (TokenA) {
        return averageDepositSize.toA();
    }

    function averageDepositSizeAsTokenB() public view returns (TokenB) {
        return averageDepositSize.toB();
    }

    function convertAToB(TokenA amount) public {
        address owner = msg.sender;
        require(balanceOfTokenA[owner] >= amount);

>         balanceOfTokenA[owner] = balanceOfTokenA[owner] + -amount;

Author: @matheusaaguiar
This is a quick and dirty way I used to shoehorn the unary `-` into the example. Maybe we could come up with something better though.

Reviewer 2: I though about that, but does it make sense to have `-`, since the underlying type is `uint`?

        balanceOfTokenB[owner] = balanceOfTokenB[owner] + amount.toB();
    }
}
```

`Tokens.sol`
```solidity
pragma solidity ^0.8.19;

> import "./TokenOperators.sol";

Reviewer 3: Should we use explicit imports? This way we needlessly clutter the namespace. We could also use `import "./TokenOperators.sol" as op;` I think this syntax also makes it much clearer where identifiers come from.

Author: Good point. I did not do it to avoid having to import it all manually and making the example even longer but the `import ... as op` syntax seems to be a good compromise. Changed.

type TokenA is int;
using {addA as +, subA as -, unsubA as -, A.toB, A.toBase} for TokenA global;
using {ltA as <, gteA as >=} for TokenA global;

type TokenB is int;
using {addB as +} for TokenB global;

type BaseToken is int;
using {Base.toA, Base.toB} for BaseToken global;
using {addBase as +, subBase as -, ltBase as <, mulBase as *, divBase as /} for BaseToken global;

BaseToken constant ZERO = BaseToken.wrap(0);
BaseToken constant ONE = BaseToken.wrap(1);
```

`TokenOperators.sol`
```solidity
pragma solidity ^0.8.19;

import {TokenA, TokenB, BaseToken, ZERO} from "./Tokens.sol";

uint constant TOKEN_A_DIGITS = 10;
uint constant TOKEN_B_DIGITS = 12;

library A {
    function toBase(TokenA x) internal pure returns (BaseToken) {

>         return BaseToken.wrap(TokenA.unwrap(x) / int(10 ** TOKEN_A_DIGITS));

Author: @matheusaaguiar
This conversion loses all fractional digits. It reduces the number to the integer part. I think it would be better to instead scale it up, to something like `max(TOKEN_A_DIGITS, TOKEN_B_DIGITS)`.

This does not affect the operators, but still looks weird.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I was lacking a better idea and just wrote this... I am going to implement your suggestion.

Reviewer 2: I changed it so that when converting to `BaseToken` the value is upscaled and the reverse happens when converting back to either `A` or `B`.

    }

    function toB(TokenA a) internal pure returns (TokenB) {
        BaseToken baseValue = a.toBase();
        return baseValue.toB();
    }
}

library B {
    function toBase(TokenB x) internal pure returns (BaseToken) {
        return BaseToken.wrap(TokenB.unwrap(x) / int(10 ** TOKEN_B_DIGITS));
    }

    function toA(TokenB b) internal pure returns (TokenA) {
        return b.toBase().toA();
    }
}

library Base {
    function toA(BaseToken z) internal pure returns (TokenA) {
        return TokenA.wrap(BaseToken.unwrap(z) * int(10 ** TOKEN_A_DIGITS));
    }

    function toB(BaseToken z) internal pure returns (TokenB) {
        return TokenB.wrap(BaseToken.unwrap(z) * int(10 ** TOKEN_B_DIGITS));
    }
}

using {B.toBase, B.toA} for TokenB;

function addA(TokenA x, TokenA y) pure returns (TokenA) {

>     return (x.toBase() + y.toBase()).toA();

Reviewer 2: Maybe if `A` and `B` value is computed according to a variable rate depending on `Base`?
I have no clue if this makes sense...

#### Operators on Complex Types
While UDVTs were the primary target, in some cases it may also be reasonable to build a custom type
with a more complex underlying representation, such as a struct or a dynamic array.
The main thing holding us back here are upcoming changes to the type system that are a significant part
of our roadmap for the near future.
To avoid having to introduce breaking changes later, we decided to defer support for such operators until
these changes are behind us.

#### Operators on Mixed Types
Inability to apply operators to values of different types is somewhat constraining and lifting this
limitation is something we would like to address eventually, though it is not yet clear in what form.
There are multiple ways to achieve this.
Explicitly defining an operator for every type combination is just one of them, and not necessarily the most elegant.
For the time being, we can only say that the feature we are releasing is a minimal viable implementation
that will definitely not cause problems if considered as part of a generic type system or trait system

> with type inference.

Reviewer 4: This still has to be dropped.

Author: Dropped.

}
```

> ##### Token Conversion

Author: I think it's good enough.

```solidity

> // ==== File: TokenOperators.sol ====

Author: I usually put each file in a separate code block, with name given above the block.
